Update release procedure documentation (#1748)
spacetelescope/jdaviz: docs/dev/release.rst

Choose your adventure:

* :ref:`release-feature`
* :ref:`release-bugfix`
* :ref:`release-old`

.. _release-feature:

Releasing a minor or major version
==================================

The automated release infrastructure has proven to be reliable for a good number
of releases now, so we've been using this faster version as the default release
procedure. The longer procedure we previously used is still available in the
:ref:`release-old` section.

You can do a release from your fork directly without a clean code check-out.

#. Ensure `CI on Actions for main <https://github.com/spacetelescope/jdaviz/actions/workflows/ci_workflows.yml?query=branch%3Amain>`_
   and `RTD build for latest <https://readthedocs.org/projects/jdaviz/builds/>`_
   are passing.

#. Lock down the ``main`` branch of the repository by setting the
   `branch protection <https://github.com/spacetelescope/jdaviz/settings/branches>`_
   rule for ``main`` to some high number required to merge, so that more PRs don't
   get merged while you're releasing.

> #. Create a new branch on your fork and make sure you have updated tags too. Note

Reviewer: I think "fork" would suggest pushing to `origin`, whereas later you have this push to `upstream` directly.

```suggestion
#. Create a new local branch and make sure you have updated tags too. Note
```

   that the "x" here should actually be the letter "x", whereas the upper case "X"
   and "Y" should be replace by your major and minor version numbers::

     git fetch upstream main
     git fetch upstream --tags
     git checkout upstream/main -b vX.Y.x

#. Update the ``CHANGES.rst`` file to make sure that all the user-facing changes are listed,
   and update the release date from ``unreleased`` to current date in the ``yyyy-mm-dd`` format.
   Remove any empty subsections.

#. Update the ``CITATION.cff`` file's ``date-released`` and ``version`` fields.
   If there are new contributors to the project, add them in the ``authors``
   section.

#. Update .github/workflows/ci_workflows.yml to add specific version branch to the
   push/pull request specs. The relevant entries should look like::

     on:
       push:

>          branches:
>            - v3.1.x

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like this?
```suggestion
         branches:
           - main
           - 'v*'
         tags:
           - 'v*'
```

       pull_request:
         branches:

>            - v3.1.x

Reviewer: Does this support wildcards?  (Can we just change this permanently to `-v*`?)

Reviewer 2: Yes you can but just don't name other branches that would also match by accident (e.g., `victory` or `vontrapp`).

Reviewer: Ok, so then depending on the style of matching (regex or wildcards), maybe something like `-v?.?.x`

Author: According to [this](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#filter-pattern-cheat-sheet) I think `'v[0-9]+.[0-9]+.[0-9]+'` is probably the most robust/specific way to specify this.

>          branches:
>            - v3.1.x

Reviewer 2: Actually does it matter which branch the PR is opened against? Don't you want CI regardless?

```suggestion
```

Author: I removed this section, I'll open a separate PR to generalize the CI workflow file.

#. Do not forget to commit your changes from the last three steps::

     git add CHANGES.rst
     git add CITATION.cff
     git add .github/workflows/ci_workflows.yml
     git commit -m "Preparing release vX.Y.0"

#. Push the ``vX.Y.x`` branch to upstream.
   Make sure the CI passes. If any of the CI fails, especially the job that
   says "Release", abandon this way. Stop here; do not continue! Otherwise,
   go to the next step.

#. Go to `Releases on GitHub <https://github.com/spacetelescope/jdaviz/releases>`_
   and `create a new GitHub release <https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/managing-releases-in-a-repository>`_
   targeting the new branch you created (not ``main``!), and give it a new ``vX.Y.Z``
   tag (do not choose any existing tags). Copy the relevant section from CHANGES.rst

>    into the release notes section and clean up any formatting problems.

Reviewer: does this mean that none of the tags actually live on main?  Is there any downside to this?  I guess the other option would be to tag the minor/major release on main before forking the `vX.Y.x` branch... but I'm not sure the pros/cons to each.

Reviewer 2: We would need to lock down the release branches and never delete them. Though even if we do, I think it is recoverable as long as we have the hash. Hasn't been a problem for other bigger projects.

     Other Changes and Additions
     ---------------------------

     A.C.1 (unreleased)
     ==================

>      Bug Fixes

Reviewer 2: Do we also want to pre-populate the Viz sub-sections here?

Author: Good call, I'll add them.

     ---------

#. Commit your changes of the, uh, change log with a message, "Back to development: A.B.dev"

#. Follow procedures for :ref:`release-milestones`.

#. For your own sanity unrelated to the release, grab the new tag for your fork::

     git fetch upstream --tags

Congratulations, you have just released a new version of Jdaviz!

.. _release-bugfix:

Releasing a bugfix version
==========================

The procedure for a bugfix release is a little different from a feature release - you will

> be cherry-picking bugfixes into an existing release branch, and will also need to do some

Reviewer 2: I enabled auto-backport bot today, though it only works if there is no conflicts. The way we doing change log now, any PR with change log might not be possible to use this bot.

You can see the stuff that was (or attempted to be) backported by the bot: https://github.com/spacetelescope/jdaviz/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3Ameeseeksmachine

cleanup on the ``main`` branch.

#. Lock down the ``main`` branch of the repository by setting the
   `branch protection <https://github.com/spacetelescope/jdaviz/settings/branches>`_
   rule for ``main`` to some high number required to merge, so that more PRs don't

>    get merged while you're releasing.

Reviewer: this might actually not be necessary - but doesn't hurt - since you aren't pushing anything to main (except I suppose the change log update at the end)

Reviewer 2: Doesn't hurt, especially when there are multiple people with write access. As team grows/changes, sometimes there can be communication breakdown.

Author: This isn't strictly necessary, but as you said makes sure the change log doesn't change on main in the middle of releasing.

#. Review the ``CHANGES.rst`` file on ``main`` to see which PRs were listed in the unreleased
   bugfix version section (this should be immediately below the unreleased feature section).
   For example, if the top section is for 3.1, there should be an unreleased 3.0.X section

>    below that, where X is a number greater than 0.

Reviewer: maybe better to suggest filtering closed PRs with the milestone in case any have "no-changelog-needed" (realized this while milestoning https://github.com/spacetelescope/jdaviz/pull/1752 for backporting but it doesn't need a changelog).

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can modify the stuff in https://github.com/astropy/astropy-tools/tree/main/pr_consistency to help sanity check? Might be tedious to have to do this manually every bug fix release.

#. Checkout the ``vX.Y.x`` branch corresponding to the last feature release.

#. For any PRs to be released in this bugfix version, find the corresponding
   `merge commit <https://github.com/spacetelescope/jdaviz/commits/main>`_ in main, copy the
   full SHA of that commit, and use git's cherry-pick command to add those commits to the
   ``vX.Y.x`` branch, resolving any conflicts::

       git cherry-pick -x -m1 [commit hash]

#. The ``CHANGES.rst`` should now have all of the bug fixes to be released. Delete the
   unreleased feature version section at the top of the changelog (if that was pulled in
   while cherry-picking) and update the release date of the bugfix release section
   from ``unreleased`` to current date in the ``yyyy-mm-dd`` format. Remove any empty
   subsections.

#. Update the ``CITATION.cff`` file's ``date-released`` and ``version`` fields.
   If there are new contributors to the project, add them in the ``authors``
   section.

#. Do not forget to commit your changes from the last two steps::

     git add CHANGES.rst
     git add CITATION.cff

>      git commit -m "Preparing release vX.Y.0"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     git commit -m "Preparing release vX.Y.Z"
```

     ^^^^^^^^^

#. Commit your changes of the, uh, change log with a message, "Back to development: A.B.dev"

#. Follow procedures for :ref:`release-milestones`.

#. For your own sanity unrelated to the release, grab the new tag for your fork::

     git fetch upstream --tags

Congratulations, you have just released a new version of Jdaviz!

.. _release-milestones:

Milestones bookkeeping
======================

#. Go to `Milestones <https://github.com/spacetelescope/jdaviz/milestones>`_.

#. Create a new milestone for the next release and the next bugfix release, if
   doing a feature release, or for just the next bugfix release if you just did
   one.

#. For the milestone of this release, if there are any open issues or pull requests
   still milestoned to it, move their milestones to the next feature or bugfix
   milestone as appropriate.

#. Make sure the milestone of this release ends up with "0 open" and then close it.

#. Remind the other devs of the open pull requests with milestone moved that they
   will need to move their change log entries to the new release section that you
   have created in ``CHANGES.rst`` during the release process.

.. _release-old:

> The old, long way

Reviewer 2: Do we really need this section? If we have to, we can always checkout the old copy under version control.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see you refer to this section above. Alternately, you can also generate a permalink to the old ways on GitHub and just link to that and remove this section.

Example permalink: https://github.com/spacetelescope/jdaviz/blob/a64f1a50a4ef26d92e904bfdf6e9cafcef84dbbc/docs/dev/release.rst
